Porting USB applications to the web. Part 1: libusb (#7151)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/porting-libusb-to-webusb/index.md

---

> title: 'Porting USB applications to the web. Part 1: libusb'

Author: I'm on a strict deadline, so I can't really delay this one further. I'm starting on part 2 already though - for now I have a structure, and going to add content over the next few days.

date: 2022-01-30
hero:
alt:
authors:
  - rreverser
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - webassembly
  - capabilities
  - devices
---

In [a previous post](/asyncify/), I showed how to port apps using filesystem APIs to the web with [File System Access API](/file-system-access/), WebAssembly and [Asyncify](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/asyncify.html). Now I want to continue the same topic of integrating [Fugu APIs](https://fugu-tracker.web.app/) with WebAssembly and porting apps to the web without losing important features.

I'll show how apps that communicate with USB devices can be ported to the web by porting [libusb](https://libusb.info/) - a popular USB library written in C - to WebAssembly (via [Emscripten](https://emscripten.org/)), Asyncify and [WebUSB](/usb/).

{% Aside %}
Fun fact: WebUSB in Chromium also uses libusb under the hood, so what the port achieves is, in fact, one libusb, compiled to WebAssembly, talking to another libusb, shipped as part of the browser, through an intermediate API layer. Isn't the web fun?
{% endAside %}

## First things first: a demo

> The most important thing to do when porting a library, obviously, is choosing the right demo - something that would showcase the capabilities of the ported library, allow you to test it in a variety of ways, and be visually compelling at the same time.

Author: FWIW it was meant to be tongue-in-cheek joke rather than literal "obviously", so I thought it doesn't fall under that category, but I don't feel strongly about it.

> The most important thing to do when porting a library, obviously, is choosing the right demo - something that would showcase the capabilities of the ported library, allow you to test it in a variety of ways, and be visually compelling at the same time.

Reviewer: I didn't read it as a joke. Tone in notoriously difficult in writing.

> The idea I've stopped on was DSLR remote control. In particular, an open source project [gPhoto2](http://gphoto.org/) has been in this space long enough to reverse-engineer and implement support for a wide variety of digital cameras. It supports several protocols, but the one I was most interested in was USB support, which it performs via libusb.

Author: Can I do at least

```suggestion
Idea I chose was DSLR remote control. In particular, an open source project [gPhoto2](http://gphoto.org/) has been in this space long enough to reverse-engineer and implement support for a wide variety of digital cameras. It supports several protocols, but the one I was most interested in was USB support, which it performs via libusb.
```

I want to clarify that there are various ways to use or showcase the library, I just chose this one for the demo as it seemed most compelling to me.

I've decided to describe the steps that got me to this working demo in two parts. In this blog post, I'll describe the technical details on how I've ported libusb itself, and what tricks might be necessary to port other popular libraries to Fugu APIs too. In the second post, I'll go into details on porting and integrating gPhoto2 itself.

> In the end, I got a working web application that previews live feed from a DSLR and can control its settings over USB. If you're impatient, feel free to jump ahead and check out the demo:

Author: Good catch. Initially I was going to add it in the end and only link to "jump ahead" here, but later decided to add a preview in the beginning of the article. I'll change the wording.

> In the end, I got a working web application that previews live feed from a DSLR and can control its settings over USB. If you're impatient, feel free to jump ahead and check out the demo:

Author: Reworded, added a link to the demo and an image - which is a picture of the demo running on the laptop & connected to a camera. I think I'll replace it with a pre-recorded video tomorrow though, as not all users have DSLRs to try the demo on.

    windows_cancel_transfer,
    NULL,   /* clear_transfer_priv */
    NULL,   /* handle_events */
    windows_handle_transfer_completion,
    sizeof(struct windows_context_priv),
    sizeof(union windows_device_priv),
    sizeof(struct windows_device_handle_priv),
    sizeof(struct windows_transfer_priv),
};
```

Looking through the properties, we can see that the struct includes the backend name, a set of its capabilities, handlers for various low-level USB operations in form of function pointers, and, finally, sizes to allocate for storing private device-/context-/transfer-level data.

The private data fields are useful at least for storing OS handles to all those things, as without handles we don't know which item any given operation applies to. In the web implementation, the OS handles would be the underlying WebUSB JavaScript objects. The natural way to represent and store them in Emscripten would be via the [`emscripten::val`](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/val.h.html#_CPPv4N10emscripten10emscripten3valE) class, which is provided as part of [Embind](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/connecting_cpp_and_javascript/embind.html) (Emscripten's bindings system).

> Most of the backends in the folder are implemented in C, but a few are implemented in C++ as well. Embind only works with C++, so the choice was made for me and I've added `libusb/libusb/os/emscripten_webusb.cpp` with the required structure and with `sizeof(val)` for the private data fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the backends in the folder are implemented in C, but a few are implemented in C++. Embind only works with C++, so the choice was made for me and I've added `libusb/libusb/os/emscripten_webusb.cpp` with the required structure and with `sizeof(val)` for the private data fields:
```

```cpp
#include <emscripten.h>
#include <emscripten/val.h>

#include "libusbi.h"

using namespace emscripten;

// …function implementations

const usbi_os_backend usbi_backend = {
    .name = "Emscripten + WebUSB backend",
    .caps = LIBUSB_CAP_HAS_CAPABILITY,
    // …handlers - function pointers to implementations above
    .device_priv_size = sizeof(val),
    .transfer_priv_size = sizeof(val),
};
```

### Storing WebUSB objects as device handles

> libusb provides ready-to-use pointers to the allocated area for private data. To work with those pointers as `val` instances, I've added small helpers that can construct them in-place, retrieve them as references, and move values out:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
libusb provides ready-to-use pointers to the allocated area for private data. To work with those pointers as `val` instances, I've added small helpers that construct them in-place, retrieve them as references, and move values out:
```

```cpp
// We store an Embind handle to WebUSB USBDevice in "priv" metadata of
// libusb device, this helper returns a pointer to it.
struct ValPtr {
 public:
  void init_to(val &&value) { new (ptr) val(std::move(value)); }

  val &get() { return *ptr; }
  val take() { return std::move(get()); }

 protected:
  ValPtr(val *ptr) : ptr(ptr) {}

 private:
  val *ptr;
};

struct WebUsbDevicePtr : ValPtr {
 public:
  WebUsbDevicePtr(libusb_device *dev)
      : ValPtr(static_cast<val *>(usbi_get_device_priv(dev))) {}
};

val &get_web_usb_device(libusb_device *dev) {
  return WebUsbDevicePtr(dev).get();
}

struct WebUsbTransferPtr : ValPtr {
 public:
  WebUsbTransferPtr(usbi_transfer *itransfer)
      : ValPtr(static_cast<val *>(usbi_get_transfer_priv(itransfer))) {}
};
```

### Async web APIs in synchronous C contexts

Now I've needed a way to handle async WebUSB APIs where libusb expects synchronous operations. For this, I could use Asyncify, or, more specifically, its Embind integration via [`val::await()`](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/val.h.html#_CPPv4NK10emscripten10emscripten3val5awaitEv).

> I also wanted to correctly handle WebUSB errors and convert them into libusb error codes, but Embind currently doesn't have any way to handle JavaScript exceptions or `Promise` rejections from the C++ side. This problem can be worked around by catching a rejection on the JavaScript side and converting the result into an `{ error, value }` object that can be now safely parsed from the C++ side. This was accomplished by combination of [`EM_JS`](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/emscripten.h.html#c.EM_JS) macro and [`Emval.to{Handle, Value}`](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/val.h.html#_CPPv4NK10emscripten10emscripten3val9as_handleEv) APIs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I also wanted to correctly handle WebUSB errors and convert them into libusb error codes, but Embind currently doesn't have any way to handle JavaScript exceptions or `Promise` rejections from the C++ side. This problem can be worked around by catching a rejection on the JavaScript side and converting the result into an `{ error, value }` object that can be now safely parsed from the C++ side. I did this with a combination of the [`EM_JS`](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/emscripten.h.html#c.EM_JS) macro and [`Emval.to{Handle, Value}`](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/val.h.html#_CPPv4NK10emscripten10emscripten3val9as_handleEv) APIs:
```

        {
          errorCode = -2; // LIBUSB_ERROR_INVALID_PARAM
        }
        return {error: errorCode, value: undefined};
      }
    );
    return Emval.toHandle(promise);
  });
// clang-format on

val em_promise_catch(val &&promise) {
  EM_VAL handle = promise.as_handle();
  handle = em_promise_catch_impl(handle);
  return val::take_ownership(handle);
}

// C++ struct representation for {value, error} object from above
// (performs conversion in the constructor).
struct promise_result {
  libusb_error error;
  val value;

  promise_result(val &&result)
      : error(static_cast<libusb_error>(result["error"].as<int>())),
        value(result["value"]) {}

  // C++ counterpart of the promise helper above that takes a promise, catches
  // its error, converts to a libusb status and returns the whole thing as
  // `promise_result` struct for easier handling.
  static promise_result await(val &&promise) {
    promise = em_promise_catch(std::move(promise));
    return {promise.await()};
  }
};
```

Now I could use `promise_result::await` on any `Promise` returned from WebUSB operations and inspect its `error` and `value` fields separately.

> For example, retrieving a `val` representing a [`USBDevice`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/USBDevice) from `libusb_device_handle`, calling its [`.open()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/USBDevice/open) method, awaiting its result and returning an error code as a libusb status code looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, retrieving a `val` representing a [`USBDevice`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/USBDevice) from `libusb_device_handle`, calling its [`open()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/USBDevice/open) method, awaiting its result, and returning an error code as a libusb status code looks like this:
```

Reviewer: We don't include the period for standalone method references. We do use a comma before the 'and' for items in a list (Oxford comma).

Author: Ah interesting, I find `.` distinction between standalone function vs methods helpful, but, of course, general styleguide is more important.

```cpp
int em_open(libusb_device_handle *handle) {
  auto web_usb_device = get_web_usb_device(handle->dev);
  return promise_result::await(web_usb_device.call<val>("open")).error;
}
```

### Device enumeration

> Of course, before any device can be opened, libusb needs to retrieve a list of available devices. The backend must implement this operation via a `get_device_list` handler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, before I can open any device, libusb needs to retrieve a list of available devices. The backend must implement this operation via a `get_device_list` handler.
```

Reviewer: A certain amount of passive voice is OK, but general, active voice is better.

> The difficulty is that, unlike on other platforms, there is no way to enumerate all the connected USB devices on the web for security reasons. Instead, the flow is split into two parts. First, the web application can request devices with specific properties via [`navigator.usb.requestDevice()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/USB/requestDevice) and the user will manually choose which device they want to expose or they can reject the permission prompt. Then, you can list the already approved and connected devices via [`navigator.usb.getDevices()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/USB/getDevices).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The difficulty is that, unlike on other platforms, there is no way to enumerate all the connected USB devices on the web for security reasons. Instead, the flow is split into two parts. First, the web application requests devices with specific properties via [`navigator.usb.requestDevice()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/USB/requestDevice) and the user will manually choose which device they want to expose or they can reject the permission prompt. Then, you can list the already approved and connected devices via [`navigator.usb.getDevices()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/USB/getDevices).
```

Author: Should the 2nd part of that sentence be changed to use present tense too perhaps? Something like:

```suggestion
The difficulty is that, unlike on other platforms, there is no way to enumerate all the connected USB devices on the web for security reasons. Instead, the flow is split into two parts. First, the web application requests devices with specific properties via [`navigator.usb.requestDevice()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/USB/requestDevice) and the user manually chooses which device they want to expose or rejects the permission prompt. Afterwards, the application can list the already approved and connected devices via [`navigator.usb.getDevices()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/USB/getDevices).
```

Reviewer: Yes! Good catch.

Reviewer: I updated the suggestion.

Instead, I had to leave invocation of `navigator.usb.requestDevice()` to the end developer, and only expose the already approved devices from `navigator.usb.getDevices()`:

```cpp
// Store the global `navigator.usb` once upon initialisation.
thread_local const val web_usb = val::global("navigator")["usb"];

int em_get_device_list(libusb_context *ctx, discovered_devs **devs) {
  // C++ equivalent of `await navigator.usb.getDevices()`.
  // Note: at this point we must already have some devices exposed -
  // caller must have called `await navigator.usb.requestDevice(...)`
  // in response to user interaction before going to LibUSB.
  // Otherwise this list will be empty.
  auto result = promise_result::await(web_usb.call<val>("getDevices"));
  if (result.error) {
    return result.error;
  }
  auto &web_usb_devices = result.value;
  // Iterate over the exposed devices.
  uint8_t devices_num = web_usb_devices["length"].as<uint8_t>();
  for (uint8_t i = 0; i < devices_num; i++) {
    auto web_usb_device = web_usb_devices[i];
    // …
    *devs = discovered_devs_append(*devs, dev);
  }
  return LIBUSB_SUCCESS;
}
```

> Most of the backend code uses `val` and `promise_result` in a similar way as already shown above. There were few more interesting hacks I've had to do to convert properties exposed by WebUSB to those expected by libusb, both in this method and in others handling data transfer, but those implementation details are less important for the purposes of this article. Make sure to check the code and the comments if you're interested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the backend code uses `val` and `promise_result` in a similar way to what's shown above. There were few more interesting hacks I've had to do to convert properties exposed by WebUSB to those expected by libusb, both in this method and in others handling data transfer, but those implementation details are less important for the purposes of this article. Make sure to check the code and the comments if you're interested.
```

Reviewer: I can't work what the middle sentence is saying. Please try something else. This problem usually comes from trying to say too much in a single sentence. Try breaking it up.

Author: ```suggestion
Most of the backend code uses `val` and `promise_result` in a similar way as already shown above. There are few more interesting hacks in the data transfer handling code, but those implementation details are less important for the purposes of this article. Make sure to check the code and comments on Github if you're interested.
```

## Porting event loops to the web

> One more piece of `libusb` that I do want to stop on is event handling. As described in the previous article, most APIs in system languages like C are synchronous, and event handling is no exception. It's usually implemented via an infinite loop that "polls" (tries to read data or blocks execution until some data is available) from a set of external I/O sources, and, when at least one of those responds, passes that as an event to the corresponding handler. Once the handler has finished its job, the control returns to the loop, and it pauses for another poll.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One more piece of `libusb` that I want to discuss is event handling. As described in the previous article, most APIs in system languages like C are synchronous, and event handling is no exception. It's usually implemented via an infinite loop that "polls" (tries to read data or blocks execution until some data is available) from a set of external I/O sources, and, when at least one of those responds, passes that as an event to the corresponding handler. Once the handler is finished, the control returns to the loop, and it pauses for another poll.
```

Reviewer: >most APIs in system languages like C are synchronous

C is a low-level language, but I've never heard it described as a system language. Do you mean, "most system APIs used in C are synchronous"? Something elese?

Author: "System languages" is a fairly common term. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_programming_language

There are a couple of problems with this approach on the web.

> First of all, WebUSB doesn't and cannot expose raw handles of the underlying devices, so polling those directly is not an option. Second, libusb uses `eventfd` and `pipe` APIs for other events as well as for handling transfers on operating systems without raw device handles, but `eventfd` is not currently supported in Emscripten, and `pipe`, while supported, [currently doesn't conform to the spec](https://github.com/emscripten-core/emscripten/issues/13214) and can't wait for events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, WebUSB doesn't and cannot expose raw handles of the underlying devices, so polling those directly is not an option. Second, libusb uses `eventfd` and `pipe` APIs for other events as well as for handling transfers on operating systems without raw device handles, but `eventfd` is not currently supported in Emscripten, and `pipe`, while supported, [currently doesn't conform to the spec](https://github.com/emscripten-core/emscripten/issues/13214) and can't wait for events.
```

> Finally, the biggest problem is that the web has its own event loop. This global event loop is used for any external I/O operations (including `fetch`, timers, or, in this case, WebUSB), and it invokes event or `Promise` handlers whenever corresponding operation has finished. Executing another, nested, infinite event loop will block the browser's event loop from ever progressing, which means that not only will the UI become unresponsive, but also that the code will never get notifications for the very same I/O events it's waiting for. This usually results in a deadlock, and that's what happened when I tried to use libusb in a demo, too - the page froze.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the biggest problem is that the web has its own event loop. This global event loop is used for any external I/O operations (including `fetch`, timers, or, in this case, WebUSB), and it invokes event or `Promise` handlers whenever corresponding operations finish. Executing another, nested, infinite event loop will block the browser's event loop from ever progressing, which means that not only will the UI become unresponsive, but also that the code will never get notifications for the very same I/O events it's waiting for. This usually results in a deadlock, and that's what happened when I tried to use libusb in a demo, too. The page froze.
```

> Like with other blocking I/O, to port such event loops to the web, developers need to find a way to run those loops without blocking the main thread. One way is to refactor the application to handle I/O events in a separate thread and pass the results back to the main one. The other is to use Asyncify to pause the loop and wait for events in a non-blocking fashion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like with other blocking I/O, to port such event loops to the web, developers need to run those loops without blocking the main thread. One way is to refactor the application to handle I/O events in a separate thread and pass the results back to the main one. The other is to use Asyncify to pause the loop and wait for events in a non-blocking fashion.
```

Author: "find a way" seems important in this context, because it's one of those things that are easier said than done.

Reviewer: Do you think you need to tell your readers or do you think they already know? If the former, you should make the point explicit. If the latter, you don't need the extra text. How you phrase it is up to you, but here's an example. (Emphasis is so you can see what I added. I'm not recommending bolding it.)

>developers need to run those loops without blocking the main thread, **even if it can sometimes be difficult**.

Author: I do need to tell the readers since it's one of the gotchas many people switching to the web are not aware of.

> I didn't want to do significant changes to either libusb or gPhoto2, and I've already used Asyncify for `Promise` integration earlier, so that's the path I've chosen. In order to simulate a blocking variant of `poll`, for the initial proof of concept I've used a loop below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I didn't want to do significant changes to either libusb or gPhoto2, and I've already used Asyncify for `Promise` integration, so that's the path I've chosen. To simulate a blocking variant of `poll`, for the initial proof of concept I've used a loop as shown below:
```

```cpp
#ifdef __EMSCRIPTEN__
  // TODO: optimize this. Right now it will keep unwinding-rewinding the stack
  // on each short sleep until an event comes or the timeout expires.
  // We should probably create an actual separate thread that does signaling
  // or come up with a custom event mechanism to report events from
  // `usbi_signal_event` and process them here.
  double until_time = emscripten_get_now() + timeout_ms;
  do {
    // Emscripten `poll` ignores timeout param, but pass 0 explicitly just
    // in case.
    num_ready = poll(fds, nfds, 0);
    if (num_ready != 0) break;
    // Yield to the browser event loop to handle events.
    emscripten_sleep(0);
  } while (emscripten_get_now() < until_time);
#else
  num_ready = poll(fds, nfds, timeout_ms);
#endif
```

> What it does is:

Reviewer: Is this actually a sequence? Many use numbered bullets for things that aren't. If this list isn't a sequence it should be bullets instead of numbers.

Author: It is.

> 1. Invokes `poll` to check if any events were reported by the backend yet. If there are some, the loop stops, otherwise Emscripten's implementation of `poll` will immediately return with `0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Calls `poll()` to check if any events were reported by the backend yet. If there are some, the loop stops. Otherwise Emscripten's implementation of `poll` will immediately return with `0`.
```

Reviewer: Calls: simpler language
(): Make sure functions/methods telegraph themselves as such. Please do this throughout.

> 2. Invokes `emscripten_sleep(0)`. This function uses Asyncify and `setTimeout` under the hood and is used here to yield control back to the main browser event loop. This allows the browser to handle any user interactions and I/O events, including WebUSB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Calls `emscripten_sleep(0)`. This function uses Asyncify and `setTimeout()` under the hood and is used here to yield control back to the main browser event loop. This allows the browser to handle any user interactions and I/O events, including WebUSB.
```

3. Check if the specified timeout has expired yet, and, if not, continue the loop.

> As the comment mentions, this approach was not optimal, because it kept saving-restoring the entire call stack with Asyncify even when there were no USB events to handle yet (most of the time), and because `setTimeout` itself has a minimal duration of 4ms in modern browsers. Still, it worked well enough to produce 13-14 FPS livestream from DSLR in the initial proof-of-concept.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the comment mentions, this approach was not optimal, because it kept saving-restoring the entire call stack with Asyncify even when there were no USB events to handle yet (which is most of the time), and because `setTimeout()` itself has a minimal duration of 4ms in modern browsers. Still, it worked well enough to produce 13-14 FPS livestream from DSLR in the proof-of-concept.
```

Author: "initial" here is to clarify "as opposed to the final version of the demo". Do you think it being a "proof-of-concept" is enough for that distinction?

Reviewer: Yes. "initial" implies multiple proofs of concept. If you prove it once, why do you need to prove it again?

> Later, I've decided to improve it by leveraging the browser event system. There are several ways in which this implementation could be improved further, but for now I've chosen to emit custom events directly on the global object, without associating them with a particular libusb data structure. I've done so via the following wait & notify mechanism:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Later, I decided to improve it by leveraging the browser event system. There are several ways in which this implementation could be improved further, but for now I've chosen to emit custom events directly on the global object, without associating them with a particular libusb data structure. I've done so via the following wait and notify mechanism:
```

```cpp
    double until_time = emscripten_get_now() + timeout_ms;
    for (;;) {
        // Emscripten `poll` ignores timeout param, but pass 0 explicitly just
        // in case.
        num_ready = poll(fds, nfds, 0);
        if (num_ready != 0) break;
        int timeout = until_time - emscripten_get_now();
        if (timeout <= 0) break;
        int result = em_libusb_wait(timeout);
        if (result != 0) break;
    }
```

Due to significant reduction in sleeps and wake-ups, this mechanism fixed the efficiency problems of the earlier `emscripten_sleep`-based implementation, and increased the DSLR demo throughput from 13-14 FPS to consistent 30+ FPS, which is enough for a smooth live feed.

## Build system and the first test

After the backend was done, I had to add it to `Makefile.am` and `configure.ac`. The only interesting bit here is Emscripten-specific flags modification:

```bash
emscripten)
  AC_SUBST(EXEEXT, [.html])
  # Note: LT_LDFLAGS is not enough here because we need link flags for executable.
  AM_LDFLAGS="${AM_LDFLAGS} --bind -s ASYNCIFY -s ASSERTIONS -s ALLOW_MEMORY_GROWTH -s INVOKE_RUN=0 -s EXPORTED_RUNTIME_METHODS=['callMain']"
  ;;
```

> First, executables on Unix platforms normally don't have any extension. Emscripten, however, produces different output depending on which extension you request. I'm using `AC_SUBST(EXEEXT, …)` to change the executable extension to `.html` so that any executable within a package - tests and examples - becomes an HTML with Emscripten's default shell that takes care of loading and instantiating JavaScript and WebAssembly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, executables on Unix platforms normally don't have a file extension. Emscripten, however, produces different output depending on which extension you request. I'm using `AC_SUBST(EXEEXT, …)` to change the executable extension to `.html` so that any executable within a package - tests and examples - becomes an HTML with Emscripten's default shell that takes care of loading and instantiating JavaScript and WebAssembly.
```

Author: Since it's "executables" (plural), should this be "file extensions" then?

Reviewer: Yes. I fixed the suggestion.

Second, because I'm using Embind and Asyncify, I need to enable those features (`--bind -s ASYNCIFY`) as well as allow dynamic memory growth (`-s ALLOW_MEMORY_GROWTH`) via linker parameters. Unfortunately, there is no way for a library to report those flags to the linker, so every application that uses this libusb port will have to add the same linker flags into their build configuration as well.

> Finally, as mentioned earlier, WebUSB requires device enumeration to be done via a user gesture. libusb examples and tests assume that they can enumerate devices at start-up, and fail with an error without changes. Instead, I had to disable automatic execution (`-s INVOKE_RUN=0`) and expose the manual `callMain` method (`-s EXPORTED_RUNTIME_METHODS=...`).

Reviewer: >fail with an error without changes.

What do you mean by this?

> Finally, as mentioned earlier, WebUSB requires device enumeration to be done via a user gesture. libusb examples and tests assume that they can enumerate devices at start-up, and fail with an error without changes. Instead, I had to disable automatic execution (`-s INVOKE_RUN=0`) and expose the manual `callMain` method (`-s EXPORTED_RUNTIME_METHODS=...`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, as mentioned earlier, WebUSB requires device enumeration to be done via a user gesture. libusb examples and tests assume that they can enumerate devices at start-up, and fail with an error without changes. Instead, I had to disable automatic execution (`-s INVOKE_RUN=0`) and expose the manual `callMain()` method (`-s EXPORTED_RUNTIME_METHODS=...`).
```

> Once all of this was done, I could serve the generated files with a static web server, initialize WebUSB and run those HTML executables manually with the help of DevTools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once all of this was done, I could serve the generated files with a static web server, initialize WebUSB, and run those HTML executables manually with the help of DevTools.
```

> {% Img src="image/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/i6dUiRRDtb0ucKX9gHOH.png", alt="Screenshot showing Chrome window with DevTools open on a locally served `testlibusb` page. DevTools console is evaluating `navigator.usb.requestDevice({ filters: [] })`, which triggered a permission prompt and it's currently asking the user to choose a USB device that should be shared with the page. ILCE-6600 (a Sony camera) is currently selected.", width="800", height="626" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/i6dUiRRDtb0ucKX9gHOH.png", alt="Screenshot showing a Chrome window with DevTools open on a locally served `testlibusb` page. DevTools console is evaluating `navigator.usb.requestDevice({ filters: [] })`, which triggered a permission prompt and it's currently asking the user to choose a USB device that should be shared with the page. ILCE-6600 (a Sony camera) is currently selected.", width="800", height="626" %}
```

> {% Img src="image/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/0FhFjozbwA1sqk1Dhx7f.png", alt="Screenshot of the next step, with DevTools still open. After the device was selected, Console has evaluated a new expression `Module.callMain(['-v'])`, which executed the `testlibusb` app in verbose mode. The output shows various detailed information about previously connected USB camera - manufacturer Sony, product ILCE-6600, serial number, configuration etc.", width="800", height="824" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/0FhFjozbwA1sqk1Dhx7f.png", alt="Screenshot of the next step, with DevTools still open. After the device was selected, Console has evaluated a new expression `Module.callMain(['-v'])`, which executed the `testlibusb` app in verbose mode. The output shows various detailed information about the previously connected USB camera: manufacturer Sony, product ILCE-6600, serial number, configuration etc.", width="800", height="824" %}
```

It doesn't look like much, but, when porting libraries to a new platform, getting to the stage where it produces a valid output for the first time is pretty exciting!

## Using the port

As mentioned [above](#heading=h.mogcyiy1x8w8), the port depends on a few Emscripten features that currently need to be enabled at the linking stage of the application. If you want to use this libusb port in your own application, here's what you'll need to do:

1. Download libusb fork from [https://github.com/RReverser/libusb](https://github.com/RReverser/libusb) either as an archive as part of your build or add it as a git submodule in your project.
2. Run `autoreconf -fiv` in the `libusb` folder.
3. Run `emconfigure ./configure –host=wasm32 –prefix=/some/installation/path` to initialize the project for cross-compilation and to set a path where you want to put the built artifacts.
4. Run `emmake make install`.
5. Point your application or higher-level library to search for the libusb under the earlier chosen path.
6. Add the following flags to your application's link arguments: `--bind -s ASYNCIFY -s ALLOW_MEMORY_GROWTH`.

The library currently has a few limitations:

> 1. No transfer cancellation support. This is a limitation of WebUSB, which, in turn, stems from lack of cross-platform transfer cancellation in libusb itself.
> 2. No isochronous transfer support. It shouldn't be hard to add it by following the implementation of existing transfer modes as examples, but it's also a somewhat rare mode and I didn't have any devices to test it on, so for now I left it as unsupported. If you do have such devices, and want to contribute to the library, PRs are welcome!
> 3. The [earlier mentioned cross-platform limitations](#heading=h.ik9rifeitesl). Those limitations are imposed by operating systems, so not much we can do here, except ask users to override the driver or permissions. However, if you're porting HID or serial devices, you can follow the libusb example and port some other library to another Fugu API. For example, you could port a C library [hidapi](https://github.com/libusb/hidapi) to [WebHID](/hid/) and side-step those issues, associated with low-level USB access, altogether.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* No transfer cancellation support. This is a limitation of WebUSB, which, in turn, stems from lack of cross-platform transfer cancellation in libusb itself.
* No isochronous transfer support. It shouldn't be hard to add it by following the implementation of existing transfer modes as examples, but it's also a somewhat rare mode and I didn't have any devices to test it on, so for now I left it as unsupported. If you do have such devices, and want to contribute to the library, PRs are welcome!
* The [earlier mentioned cross-platform limitations](#heading=h.ik9rifeitesl). Those limitations are imposed by operating systems, so not much we can do here, except ask users to override the driver or permissions. However, if you're porting HID or serial devices, you can follow the libusb example and port some other library to another Fugu API. For example, you could port a C library [hidapi](https://github.com/libusb/hidapi) to [WebHID](/hid/) and side-step those issues, associated with low-level USB access, altogether.
```

## Conclusion

In this post I've shown how, with the help of Emscripten, Asyncify and Fugu APIs even low-level libraries like libusb can be ported to the web with a few integration tricks.

> Porting such essential and widely used low-level libraries is particularly rewarding, because, in turn, it allows to bring higher-level libraries or even whole applications to the web, too. This opens experiences that were previously limited to users of one or two platforms, to all kinds of devices and operating systems, making those experiences available just a link click away.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Porting such essential and widely used low-level libraries is particularly rewarding, because, in turn, it allows to bringing higher-level libraries or even whole applications to the web, too. This opens experiences that were previously limited to users of one or two platforms, to all kinds of devices and operating systems, making those experiences just a link click away.
```

Author: Hmm "it allows to bringing" doesn't sound right grammatically.

Reviewer: Yeah, I messed that suggestion up. I removed 'to'.

Author: Why did you remove "available" btw? Without it that sentence doesn't sound right either.

Reviewer: It doesn't sound weird to me. 'Just a click away' means available, making the word redundant.

Author: Right but together with the verb before it reads as "making them a click away" which, to me, sounds like it's possible to _make_ them easily rather than _access_ them easily, so "available" or "accessible" feels necessary.

Reviewer: 'Making' has [two definitions in English](https://www.google.com/search?q=making+definition&oq=making+definition&aqs=chrome..69i57j0i512l2j69i60j69i65l3j69i61.2539j1j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8). This is entirely idiomatic.

Author: Ah. Perhaps it's just one of those things that sound fine to native speakers who are aware of the secondary meaning, but that non-native speakers like me might stumble upon when reading. I can remove the word if you insist though.
